The Merchant of Venice
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
http://www.folgerdigitaltexts.org/?chapter=5&play=MV
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
PORTIA, an heiress of Belmont
NERISSA, her waiting-gentlewoman
Servants to Portia:
  BALTHAZAR
  STEPHANO
Suitors to Portia:
  Prince of MOROCCO
  Prince of ARRAGON
ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
BASSANIO, a Venetian gentleman, suitor to Portia
Companions of Antonio and Bassanio:
  SOLANIO
  SALARINO
  GRATIANO
  LORENZO
LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
SHYLOCK, a Jewish moneylender in Venice
JESSICA, his daughter
TUBAL, another Jewish moneylender
LANCELOT GOBBO, servant to Shylock and later to Bassanio
OLD GOBBO, Lancelot's father
SALERIO, a messenger from Venice
Jailer
Duke of Venice
Magnificoes of Venice
Servants
Attendants and followers
Messenger
Musicians




ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Antonio, Salarino, and Solanio.]


ANTONIO
In sooth I know not why I am so sad.
It wearies me, you say it wearies you.
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born,
I am to learn.

SALARINO
Your mind is tossing on the ocean,
There where your argosies with portly sail
Do overpeer the petty traffickers
That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
As they fly by them with their woven wings.

SOLANIO
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. 
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

SALARINO  My wind cooling my broth
Would blow me to an ague when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
I should not see the sandy hourglass run
But I should think of shallows and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew docked in sand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
To kiss her burial. Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechanced would make me sad?
But tell not me: I know Antonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

ANTONIO
Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

SOLANIO
Why then you are in love.

ANTONIO  Fie, fie!

SOLANIO
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. 
[Enter Bassanio, Lorenzo, and Gratiano.]

Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare you well.
We leave you now with better company.

SALARINO
I would have stayed till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.

ANTONIO
Your worth is very dear in my regard.

SALARINO
Good morrow, my good lords.
We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
[Salarino and Solanio exit.]

LORENZO
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
We two will leave you. But at dinner time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.


BASSANIO
I will not fail you.

GRATIANO
You look not well, Signior Antonio.
You have too much respect upon the world.
They lose it that do buy it with much care.
Believe me, you are marvelously changed.

ANTONIO
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano,
A stage where every man must play a part,
And mine a sad one.

GRATIANO  Let me play the fool.
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my liver rather heat with wine
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
O my Antonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing, when, I am very sure,
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers
fools.
I'll tell thee more of this another time.

Come, good Lorenzo.--Fare you well a while.
I'll end my exhortation after dinner.

LORENZO
Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never lets me speak.

GRATIANO
Well, keep me company but two years more,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own
tongue.

ANTONIO
Fare you well. I'll grow a talker for this gear.

GRATIANO
Thanks, i' faith, [Gratiano and Lorenzo exit.]

ANTONIO  Is that anything now?

BASSANIO  Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing,
more than any man in all Venice. 

ANTONIO
Well, tell me now of the lady 
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage?

BASSANIO
'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
How much I have disabled mine estate
By something showing a more swelling port
Than my faint means would grant continuance.
But my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio,
I owe the most in money and in love,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

ANTONIO
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it;
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlocked to your occasions.


BASSANIO
In my school days, when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight
The selfsame way with more advised watch
To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
I oft found both. But if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
I do not doubt,
To bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

ANTONIO
You know me well, 
Do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am prest unto it..

BASSANIO
In Belmont is a lady richly left,
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Her name is Portia, 
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
O my Antonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,


ANTONIO
Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea;
Therefore go forth:
Try what my credit can in Venice do;
That shall be racked even to the uttermost
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently inquire, and so will I.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Portia with her waiting woman Nerissa.]


PORTIA  By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary
of this great world.

NERISSA  You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries
were in the same abundance as your good fortunes
are. 

PORTIA  Good sentences, and well pronounced.

NERISSA  They would be better if well followed.

PORTIA  If to do were as easy as to know what were
good to do, chapels had been churches, and poor
men's cottages princes' palaces. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
choose me a husband. O, me, the word "choose"! I
may neither choose who I would nor refuse who I
dislike. So is the will of a living daughter curbed by
the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, that
I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?

NERISSA  Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men
at their death have good inspirations. Therefore the
lottery that he hath devised in these three chests of
gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his
meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be
chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly
love. But what warmth is there in your affection
towards any of these princely suitors that are already
come?

PORTIA  I pray thee, overname them, and as thou
namest them, I will describe them, and according
to my description level at my affection.

NERISSA  First, there is the Neapolitan prince.

PORTIA  Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but
talk of his horse, 

NERISSA  Then is there the County Palatine.

PORTIA  He doth nothing but frown, as who should say
"An you will not have me, choose." 

NERISSA  How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le
Bon?

PORTIA  God made him, and therefore let him pass for
a man. 

NERISSA  What say you then to Falconbridge, the young
baron of England?

PORTIA  You know I say nothing to him, for he understands
not me, nor I him. 

NERISSA  How like you the young German, the Duke of
Saxony's nephew?

PORTIA  Very vilely in the morning, when he is sober,
and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk.

NERISSA  If he should offer to choose, and choose the
right casket, you should refuse to perform your
father's will if you should refuse to accept him.

PORTIA  I pray thee set
a deep glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary
casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation
without, I know he will choose it. 

NERISSA  You need not fear, lady, the having any of
these lords. They have acquainted me with their
determinations, which is indeed to return to their
home and to trouble you with no more suit, 

PORTIA  If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as
chaste as Diana unless I pray God
grant them a fair departure!

NERISSA  Do you not remember, lady, in your father's
time, a Venetian, that came
hither?

PORTIA  Yes, yes, it was Bassanio--as I think so was he
called.

NERISSA  True, madam. He, of all the men that ever my
foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a
fair lady.

PORTIA  I remember him worthy of thy praise.

[Enter a Servingman.]

How now, what news?

SERVINGMAN  The four strangers seek for you, madam,
to take their leave. And there is a forerunner come
from a fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings
word the Prince his master will be here tonight.

PORTIA  If he have the condition of
a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had rather
he should shrive me than wive me.
Come, Nerissa. [To Servingman.] Sirrah, go before.--
Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another
knocks at the door.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Bassanio with Shylock the Jew.]


SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats, well.

BASSANIO  Ay, sir, for three months.

SHYLOCK  For three months, well.

BASSANIO  For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall
be bound.

SHYLOCK  Antonio shall become bound, well.

BASSANIO  May you stead me? Will you pleasure me?
Shall I know your answer?

SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats for three months,
and Antonio bound.

BASSANIO  Your answer to that?

SHYLOCK  Antonio is a good man.

BASSANIO  Have you heard any imputation to the
contrary?

SHYLOCK  Ho, no, no, no, no! My meaning in saying he
is a good man is to have you understand me that he
is sufficient. Three thousand ducats.
I think I may take his bond.

BASSANIO  Be assured you may.

SHYLOCK  I will be assured I may. And that I may be
assured, I will bethink me. May I speak with
Antonio?

BASSANIO  If it please you to dine with us.

SHYLOCK  I will buy with you, sell with you, talk
with you, walk with you, and so following; but I
will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with
you.---Who is he comes
here?

[Enter Antonio.]


BASSANIO  This is Signior Antonio.

SHYLOCK, [aside]
How like a fawning publican he looks!
I hate him for he is a Christian,
But more for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls "interest." Cursed be my tribe
If I forgive him!

BASSANIO  Shylock, do you hear?

SHYLOCK
I am debating of my present store,
And, by the near guess of my memory,
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furnish me. [To Antonio.] Rest you fair, good
signior!
Your Worship was the last man in our mouths.


ANTONIO
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I'll break a custom. 

SHYLOCK
Well then, your bond. And let me see--but hear
you:
Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

ANTONIO  I do never use it.

SHYLOCK
When Jacob grazed his Uncle Laban's sheep--
This Jacob from our holy Abram was


ANTONIO, [aside to Bassanio]
Mark you this, Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose!
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?

SHYLOCK
Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
In the Rialto you have rated me
About my moneys and my usances.
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug
(For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe).
You call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog,
And spat upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help.
Go to, then. You come to me and you say
"Shylock, we would have moneys"--you say so,
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold. Moneys is your suit.
What should I say to you? Should I not say
"Hath a dog money? Is it possible
A cur can lend three thousand ducats?" Or
Shall I bend low, and in a bondman's key,
With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,
Say this: "Fair sir, you spat on me on Wednesday
last;
You spurned me such a day; another time
You called me 'dog'; and for these courtesies
I'll lend you thus much moneys"?

ANTONIO
I am as like to call thee so again,
To spit on thee again, to spurn thee, too.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends,
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
.

SHYLOCK  Why, look you how you storm!
I would be friends with you and have your love,
 This kindness will I show.
Go with me to a notary, seal me there
Your single bond; and in a merry sport,
If you repay me not let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body pleaseth me.

ANTONIO
Content, in faith. I'll seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

BASSANIO
You shall not seal to such a bond for me!

ANTONIO
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it!

SHYLOCK
O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others! Pray you tell me this:
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
To buy his favor I extend this friendship.
If he will take it, so. If not, adieu;

ANTONIO
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.

SHYLOCK
Then meet me forthwith at the notary's.
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
and presently I'll be with you.

ANTONIO  Hie thee, gentle Jew.
[Shylock exits.]
The Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind.

BASSANIO
I like not fair terms and a villain's mind.

ANTONIO
Come on, in this there can be no dismay;
My ships come home a month before the day.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Prince of Morocco, a tawny Moor all in
white, and three or four followers accordingly, with
Portia, Nerissa, and their train.]


MOROCCO
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnished sun,
To whom I am a neighbor and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
And let us make incision for your love
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
Hath feared the valiant; by my love I swear
The best regarded virgins of our clime
Have loved it too. I would not change this hue
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.

PORTIA
In terms of choice I am not solely led
By nice direction of a maiden's eyes;
Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.


MOROCCO  I pray you lead me to the caskets
To try my fortune. 

PORTIA  You must take your chance
And either not attempt to choose at all
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to lady afterward
In way of marriage. 

MOROCCO
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.

PORTIA
First, forward to the temple. After dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

MOROCCO  Good fortune then,
To make me blest--or cursed'st among men!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Lancelot Gobbo the Clown, alone.]


LANCELOT  Certainly my conscience will serve me to
run from this Jew my master. The fiend is at mine
elbow and tempts me, saying to me "Gobbo,
Lancelot Gobbo, good Lancelot," or "good Gobbo,"
or "good Lancelot Gobbo, use your legs, take
the start, run away." My conscience says "No. Take
heed, honest Lancelot, take heed, honest Gobbo,"
or, as aforesaid, "honest Lancelot Gobbo, do not
run; scorn running with thy heels." "Budge," says the fiend. "Conscience," say I, "you
counsel well." "Fiend," say I, "you counsel well."
To be ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the
Jew my master, who is a kind
of devil; and to run away from the Jew, I should be
ruled by the fiend, who is
the devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil
incarnation, and my conscience
is but a kind of hard conscience to offer to counsel
me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more
friendly counsel. I will run, fiend. My heels are at
your commandment. 
[Enter old Gobbo with a basket.]


GOBBO  Master young man, you, I pray you, which is
the way to Master Jew's?

LANCELOT, [aside]  O heavens, this is my true begotten
father, who being blind,
knows me not. I will try confusions with him.

GOBBO  Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is
the way to Master Jew's?

LANCELOT  Turn up on your right hand at the next
turning, but at the next turning of all on your left;
marry, at the very next turning, turn of no hand,
but turn down indirectly to the Jew's house.

GOBBO  Be God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit.
Can you tell me whether one Lancelot, that dwells
with him, dwell with him or no?

LANCELOT  Talk you of young Master Lancelot? [Aside.]
Mark me now, now will I raise the waters.--

GOBBO  No master, sir, but a poor man's son. His
father, though I say 't, is an honest exceeding poor
man and, God be thanked, well to live.

LANCELOT  Well, let his father be what he will, we talk
of young Master Lancelot.

GOBBO  Your Worship's friend, and Lancelot, sir.

LANCELOT  But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech
you, talk you of young Master Lancelot?

GOBBO  Of Lancelot, an 't please your mastership.

LANCELOT Ergo, Master Lancelot. Talk not of Master
Lancelot, father, for the young gentleman, according
to Fates and Destinies, the
Sisters Three, is
indeed deceased, or, as you would say in plain
terms, gone to heaven.

GOBBO  Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff
of my age, my very prop.

LANCELOT, [aside]  Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post,
a staff or a prop?--Do you know me, father?

GOBBO  Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman.
But I pray you tell me, is my boy, God rest his
soul, alive or dead?

LANCELOT  Do you not know me, father?

GOBBO  Alack, sir, I am blind. I know you not.

LANCELOT  It is a wise father that
knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you
news of your son. [He kneels.] Give me your blessing.
Truth will come to light, murder cannot be hid
long--a man's son may, but in the end, truth will
out.

GOBBO  Pray you, sir, stand up! I am sure you are not
Lancelot my boy.

LANCELOT  Pray you, let's have no more fooling about
it, but give me your blessing. I am Lancelot, your
boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall
be.

GOBBO  I cannot think you are my son.

LANCELOT  I know not what I shall think of that; but I
am Lancelot, the Jew's man, 

GOBBO  I'll be sworn if
thou be Lancelot, thou art mine own flesh and
blood. Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou
and thy master agree? I have brought him a present.
How 'gree you now?

LANCELOT  Well, well. But for mine own part, as I have
set up my rest to run away. My master's a very Jew.
Give him a present! Give him a halter. I am
famished in his service. You may tell every finger I
have with my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come!
Give your present to one Master Bassanio, who
indeed gives rare new liveries. O rare
fortune, here comes the man! To him, father, for I
am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.

[Enter Bassanio with Leonardo and a follower or two.]


BASSANIO, [to an Attendant]  You may do so, See these letters delivered, put the
liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come
anon to my lodging.	[The Attendant exits.]

LANCELOT  To him, father.

GOBBO, [to Bassanio]  God bless your Worship.

BASSANIO  Gramercy. Wouldst thou aught with me?

GOBBO  Here's my son, sir, a poor boy--

LANCELOT  Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew's man,
that would, sir, as my father shall specify--

GOBBO  He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say,
to serve--

LANCELOT  Indeed, the short and the long is, I serve the
Jew, and have a desire, as my father shall specify--


BASSANIO  One speak for both. What would you?

LANCELOT  Serve you, sir.

GOBBO  That is the very defect of the matter, sir.

BASSANIO, [to Lancelot]
I know thee well. Thou hast obtained thy suit.
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
And hath preferred thee. 

LANCELOT  The old proverb is very well parted between
my master Shylock and you, sir: you have "the
grace of God," sir, and he hath "enough."

BASSANIO
Thou speak'st it well.--Go, father, with thy son.--
[To an Attendant.] Give him a livery

[Attendant exits. Bassanio and Leonardo talk apart.]

LANCELOT  Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have
ne'er a tongue in my head! Well, if Fortune
be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear.
Father, come. I'll take my leave of the Jew in the
twinkling.	[Lancelot and old Gobbo exit.]

BASSANIO
I pray thee, good Leonardo.
[Handing him a paper.]
These things being bought and orderly bestowed,
Return in haste, for I do feast tonight
Hie thee, go.

LEONARDO
My best endeavors shall be done herein.

[Enter Gratiano.]


GRATIANO, [to Leonardo]  Where's your master?

LEONARDO  Yonder, sir, he walks.	[Leonardo exits.]

GRATIANO  Signior Bassanio!

BASSANIO  Gratiano!

GRATIANO  I have suit to you.

BASSANIO  You have obtained it.

GRATIANO  You must not deny me. I must go with you
to Belmont.

BASSANIO
Why then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,
Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice--
Pray thee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, 

GRATIANO  Signior Bassanio, hear me.
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Use all the observance of civility
never trust me more.

BASSANIO  Well, we shall see your bearing.

GRATIANO
Nay, but I bar tonight. You shall not gauge me
By what we do tonight.

BASSANIO  No, that were pity.
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment. But fare you well.
I have some business.

GRATIANO
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest.
But we will visit you at supper time.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Jessica and Lancelot Gobbo.]


JESSICA
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
But fare thee well. There is a ducat for thee,
And, Lancelot, soon at supper shalt thou see
Lorenzo, Give him this letter, do it secretly,
And so farewell. I would not have my father
See me in talk with thee.

LANCELOT Adieu. Tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful
pagan, most sweet Jew. If a Christian do not
play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived.
But adieu. 

JESSICA  Farewell, good Lancelot.
[Lancelot exits.]
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my father's child?
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
[She exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Gratiano, Lorenzo, Salarino, and Solanio.]


LORENZO
Nay, we will slink away in supper time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return
All in an hour.

GRATIANO
We have not made good preparation.

SALARINO
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.

SOLANIO
'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered,
And better in my mind not undertook.

LORENZO
We have two hours
To furnish us.

[Enter Lancelot.]

Friend Lancelot, what's the news?

LANCELOT  An it shall please you to break up this, it
shall seem to signify.	[Handing him Jessica's letter.]

LORENZO
I know the hand; in faith, 'tis a fair hand,
And whiter than the paper it writ on.

GRATIANO  Love news, in faith!

Lancelot  By your leave, sir.

LORENZO  Whither goest thou?

LANCELOT  Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to
sup tonight with my new master the Christian.

LORENZO
Hold here, take this. [Giving him money.] Tell gentle
Jessica
I will not fail her. 
[Lancelot exits.]
Go, gentlemen,
Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
I am provided of a torchbearer.

LORENZO  Meet me and Gratiano
At Gratiano's lodging.

SALARINO  'Tis good we do so.
[Salarino and Solanio exit.]

GRATIANO
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?

LORENZO
She hath directed
How I shall take her from her father's house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughter's sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
Come, go with me. [Handing him the letter.]
Fair Jessica shall be my torchbearer.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Shylock, the Jew, and Lancelot,
his man that was, the Clown.]


SHYLOCK
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.--
What, Jessica!--Thou shalt not gormandize
As thou hast done with me--what, Jessica!--
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.--
Why, Jessica, I say!

LANCELOT  Why, Jessica!

SHYLOCK
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.

LANCELOT  Your Worship was wont to tell me I could
do nothing without bidding.

[Enter Jessica.]


JESSICA  Call you? What is your will?

SHYLOCK
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica.
There are my keys.--But wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love. They flatter me.
But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian.--Jessica, my girl,
Look to my house.--I am right loath to go.
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest.

LANCELOT I beseech you, sir, go. My young master
doth expect your reproach.

SHYLOCK  So do I his.

LANCELOT  And they have conspired together--I will
not say you shall see a masque, but if you do, then it
was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on
Black Monday last, at six o'clock i' th' morning.

SHYLOCK
What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces,
But stop my house's ears (I mean my casements).
Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
My sober house. By Jacob's staff I swear
I have no mind of feasting forth tonight.
But I will go.--

LANCELOT  I will go before, sir. [Aside to Jessica.] Mistress,
look out at window for all this.
There will come a Christian by
Will be worth a Jewess' eye.	[He exits.]

SHYLOCK
What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?

JESSICA
His words were "Farewell, mistress," nothing else.

SHYLOCK
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
Therefore I part with him, Well, Jessica, go in.
Do as I bid you. Shut doors after you.
Fast bind, fast find--
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.	[He exits.]

JESSICA
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
I have a father, you a daughter, lost.
[She exits.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter the masquers, Gratiano and Salarino.]


GRATIANO
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired us to make stand.

SALARINO  His hour is almost past.

GRATIANO
And it is marvel he outdwells his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.

SALARINO
O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly
To seal love's bonds new-made than they are wont
To keep obliged faith unforfeited.

GRATIANO
That ever holds. All things that are,
Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed.


[Enter Lorenzo.]


SALARINO
Here comes Lorenzo. 

LORENZO
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode.
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
I'll watch as long for you then. Approach.
Here dwells my father Jew.--Ho! Who's within?

[Enter Jessica above, dressed as a boy.]


JESSICA
Who are you? Tell me for more certainty,
Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.

LORENZO  Lorenzo, and thy love.

JESSICA
Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me,
For I am much ashamed of my exchange.

LORENZO
Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.

JESSICA
What, must I hold a candle to my shames?
Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
And I should be obscured.

LORENZO  So are you, sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
But come at once,


JESSICA
I will make fast the doors and gild myself
With some more ducats, and be with you straight.
[Jessica exits, above.]

GRATIANO
Now, by my hood, a gentle and no Jew!

LORENZO
Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
For she is fair, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she hath proved herself.
And therefore, Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

[Enter Jessica, below.]

What, art thou come? On, gentleman, away!

[All exit.]


Scene 7
=======
[Enter Portia with the Prince of Morocco and both
their trains.]


PORTIA
Go, and discover
The several caskets to this noble prince.
[A curtain is drawn.]
Now make your choice.

MOROCCO
This first, of gold, who this inscription bears,
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire";
The second, silver, which this promise carries,
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves";
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
How shall I know if I do choose the right?

PORTIA
The one of them contains my picture, prince.
If you choose that, then I am yours.

MOROCCO
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see.
I will survey th' inscriptions back again.
What says this leaden casket?
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
Must Hazard for lead?
I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
As much as he deserves--pause there, Morocco,
And weigh thy value with an even hand.
As much as I deserve--why, that's the lady!
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding,
What if I strayed no farther, but chose here?
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold:
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire."
Why, that's the lady! All the world desires her.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is 't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation
To think so base a thought. 
Or shall I think in silver she's immured,
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
O, sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
Was set in worse than gold..--Deliver me the key.
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.

PORTIA
There, take it, prince. [Handing him the key.] And if
my form lie there,
Then I am yours.
	[Morocco opens the gold casket.]

MOROCCO  O hell! What have we here?
A carrion death within whose empty eye
There is a written scroll. I'll read the writing:
	All that glisters is not gold--
	Often have you heard that told.
	Many a man his life hath sold
	But my outside to behold.
	Gilded tombs do worms infold.
	Had you been as wise as bold,
	Young in limbs, in judgment old,
	Your answer had not been enscrolled.
	Fare you well, your suit is cold.
Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost.
Portia, adieu. I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.
[He exits, with his train.]

PORTIA
A gentle riddance! go.
Let all of his complexion choose me so.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Enter Salarino and Solanio.]


SALARINO
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.

SOLANIO
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.

SALARINO
He came too late; the ship was under sail.
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a gondola were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica.
Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

SOLANIO
I never heard a passion so confused,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
"My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter!
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
And jewels--two stones, two rich and precious
stones--
Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl!
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats."


SALARINO
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying "His stones, his daughter, and his ducats."

SOLANIO
Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
Or he shall pay for this.

SALARINO  Marry, well remembered.
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday
Who told me, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught.
I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
And wished in silence that it were not his.

SOLANIO
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear--
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

SALARINO
A kinder gentleman treads not the Earth.
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part.
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return. He answered "Do not so.
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time;
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love.."
And even there, his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sensible
He wrung Bassanio's hand--and so they parted.

SOLANIO
I think he only loves the world for him.
I pray thee, let us go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.

SALARINO  Do we so.
[They exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Enter Nerissa and a Servitor.]


NERISSA
Quick, quick, The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath
And comes to his election presently.

[Enter the Prince of Arragon, his train, and Portia.]


PORTIA
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince.
If you choose that wherein I am contained,
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized.
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.

ARRAGON
I am enjoined by oath to observe three things:
First, never to unfold to anyone
Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage;
Lastly, if I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you, and be gone.
[He moves toward the caskets]

Fortune now
To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest? Ha, let me see:
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire."
What many men desire--that "many" may be
meant
By the fool multitude that choose by show,
I will not choose what many men desire,
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why, then, to thee, thou silver treasure house.
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
And well said, too; for who shall go about
To cozen fortune and be honorable
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity.


Well, but to my choice.
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
[He is given a key.]
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
[He opens the silver casket.]

PORTIA
Too long a pause for that which you find there.

ARRAGON
What's here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings.
"Who chooseth me shall have as much as he
deserves"?
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?


ARRAGON  What is here?
[He reads.]

	The fire seven times tried this;
	Seven times tried that judgment is
	That did never choose amiss.
	Some there be that shadows kiss;
	Such have but a shadow's bliss.
	There be fools alive, iwis,
	Silvered o'er--and so was this.
	Take what wife you will to bed,
	I will ever be your head.
	So begone; you are sped.
Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here.
With one fool's head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet, adieu.	[He exits with his train.]

PORTIA
O, these deliberate fools, when they do choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

NERISSA
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.

PORTIA  Come, Nerissa.

[Enter Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Where is my lady?

PORTIA  Here. 

MESSENGER
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify th' approaching of his lord,
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath),
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet,
To show how costly summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.

PORTIA
No more, I pray thee. Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.

NERISSA
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Solanio and Salarino.]


SOLANIO  Now, what news on the Rialto?

SALARINO  Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio
hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the
Narrow Seasa very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the
carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say,
.

SOLANIO  But
it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing
the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio,
the honest Antonio- he
hath lost a ship.

SALARINO  I would it might prove the end of his losses.

SOLANIO  Let me say "amen" betimes, lest the devil
cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness
of a Jew.

[Enter Shylock.]

How now, Shylock, what news among the
merchants?

SHYLOCK  You knew, none so well as you,
of my daughter's flight.

SALARINO  That's certain. I for my part knew the tailor
that made the wings she flew withal.

SOLANIO  And Shylock for his own part knew the bird
was fledge, and then it is the complexion of them
all to leave the dam.

SHYLOCK  She is damned for it.

SALARINO  That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.

SHYLOCK  My own flesh and blood to rebel!

SOLANIO  Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these
years?

SHYLOCK  I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.

SALARINO  There is more difference between thy flesh
and hers than between jet and ivory, more between
your bloods than there is between red wine and
Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio
have had any loss at sea or no?

SHYLOCK  There I have another bad match! 
Let him look to his bond. He was
wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. He
was wont to lend money for a Christian cur'sy; let
him look to his bond.

SALARINO  Why, I am sure if he forfeit, thou wilt not
take his flesh! What's that good for?

SHYLOCK  To bait fish withal; if it will feed nothing else,
it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me and
hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses,
mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted
my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies--
and what's his reason? I am a Jew. Hath not
a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions,
senses, affections, passions? Fed with the
same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to
the same diseases, healed by the same means,
warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer
as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not
bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh? If you
poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall
we not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will
resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian,
what is his humility? Revenge. If a Christian wrong
a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian
example? Why, revenge! The villainy you teach me I
will execute, and it shall go hard but I will better the
instruction.

[Enter a man from Antonio.]


SERVINGMAN  Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his
house and desires to speak with you both.

SALARINO  We have been up and down to seek him.

[Enter Tubal.]


SOLANIO  Here comes another of the tribe; 
[Salarino, Solanio, and the Servingman exit.]

SHYLOCK  How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa?
Hast thou found my daughter?

TUBAL  I often came where I did hear of her, but
cannot find her.

SHYLOCK  Why, there, there, there, there! The curse never fell upon our nation till now, I
never felt it till now. I would my
daughter were dead at my foot and the jewels in her
ear; would she were hearsed at my foot and the
ducats in her coffin. No news of them? Why so? 
The thief gone with so much, and so
much to find the thief, and no satisfaction, no
revenge, nor no ill luck stirring but what lights a' my
shoulders,, no tears but
a' my shedding.

TUBAL  Yes, other men have ill luck, too. Antonio, as I
heard in Genoa--

SHYLOCK  What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?

TUBAL  --hath an argosy cast away coming from
Tripolis.

SHYLOCK  I thank God, I thank God! Is it true, is it true?

TUBAL  I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped
the wrack.

SHYLOCK  I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good
news! Ha, ha, heard in Genoa--

TUBAL  Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one
night fourscore ducats.

SHYLOCK  Thou stick'st a dagger in me. Fourscore ducats at a sitting,
fourscore ducats!

TUBAL  There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my
company to Venice that swear he cannot choose
but break.

SHYLOCK  I am very glad of it. 

TUBAL  One of them showed me a ring that he had of
your daughter for a monkey.

SHYLOCK  Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It
was my turquoise! I had it of Leah when I was a
bachelor. I would not have given it for a wilderness
of monkeys.

TUBAL  But Antonio is certainly undone.

SHYLOCK  Nay, that's true, that's very true. Go, Tubal,
fee me an officer. I
will have the heart of him if he forfeit,.
Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. 
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Bassanio, Portia, and all their trains, Gratiano,
Nerissa.]


PORTIA
I pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I lose your company; 
But lest you should not understand me well
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn.
I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time,
To eche it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.

BASSANIO  Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.

PORTIA
Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.

BASSANIO
None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love.

PORTIA
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack
Where men enforced do speak anything.

BASSANIO
Promise me life and I'll confess the truth.

PORTIA
Well, then, confess and live.

BASSANIO  "Confess and love"
Had been the very sum of my confession.
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

PORTIA
Away, then. I am locked in one of them.
If you do love me, you will find me out.--
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.
Let music sound while he doth make his choice.

[A song the whilst Bassanio comments on
the caskets to himself.]



	Tell me where is fancy bred,
	Or in the heart, or in the head?
	How begot, how nourished?
	   Reply, reply.
	It is engendered in the eye,
	With gazing fed, and fancy dies
	In the cradle where it lies.
	Let us all ring fancy's knell.
	I'll begin it.--Ding, dong, bell.

ALL	Ding, dong, bell.

BASSANIO
So may the outward shows be least themselves;
The world is still deceived with ornament.
There is no vice so simple but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
Therefore, then, thou gaudy
Gold, I will none of thee.
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
'Tween man and man. But thou, thou meager lead,
Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught,
Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence,
And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
[Bassanio is given a key.]

PORTIA, [aside]
O love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
I feel too much thy blessing. Make it less,
For fear I surfeit.
[Bassanio opens the lead casket.]

BASSANIO  What find I here?
Fair Portia's counterfeit! What demigod
Hath come so near creation? Here's the scroll,
The continent and summary of my fortune.
[He reads the scroll.]
	You that choose not by the view
	Chance as fair and choose as true.
	Since this fortune falls to you,
	Be content and seek no new.
	If you be well pleased with this
	And hold your fortune for your bliss,
	Turn you where your lady is,
	And claim her with a loving kiss.
A gentle scroll! Fair lady, by your leave,
I come by note to give and to receive.
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.

PORTIA
You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
Such as I am. Though for myself alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish
To wish myself much better, yet for you
I would be more rich, that only to stand high in your account
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account. This house, these servants, and this same myself
Are yours, my lord's. I give them with this ring,
[Handing him a ring.]
Which, when you part from, lose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

BASSANIO
Madam, you have bereft me of all words.
When this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.
O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead!

NERISSA
My lord and lady, it is now our time,
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry "Good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!"

GRATIANO
My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish,
And when your honors mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.

BASSANIO
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.

GRATIANO
I thank your Lordship, you have got me one.
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid.
I got a promise of this fair one here
To have her love, provided that your fortune
Achieved her mistress.

PORTIA  Is this true, Nerissa?

NERISSA
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.

BASSANIO
Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.


[Enter Lorenzo, Jessica, and Salerio, a messenger
from Venice.]

GRATIANO But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
What, and my old Venetian friend Salarino?

BASSANIO
[To Portia.] By
your leave,
I bid my very friends and countrymen,
Sweet Portia, welcome.

PORTIA
So do I, my lord. They are entirely welcome.

LORENZO, [to Bassanio]
I thank your Honor. My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salarino by the way,
He did entreat me past all saying nay

SALARINO  I did, my lord,
	[Handing him a paper.]
Signior Antonio
Commends him to you.

BASSANIO  I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.

SALARINO
His letter there
Will show you his estate.
[Bassanio opens the letter.]

GRATIANO
Nerissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.--
What's the news from Venice?
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?

[Salarino begins to answer but is interrupted by Portia]

PORTIA
There are some shrewd contents in yond same
paper
That steals the color from Bassanio's cheek.
With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself,
And I must freely have the half of anything
That this same paper brings you.

BASSANIO  Gentle lady,
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you My state was nothing,
 I should then have told you
That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
I have engaged my friend to his enemy
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
But is it true, Salerio?
Hath all his ventures failed? 

SALARINO  Not one, my lord.
Besides, it should appear that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it. He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.

JESSICA
When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
Than twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him. 
It will go hard with poor Antonio.


PORTIA
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?

BASSANIO
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,

PORTIA  What sum owes he the Jew?

BASSANIO
For me, three thousand ducats.

PORTIA  What, no more?
Pay him six thousand and deface the bond.
Double six thousand and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.
First go with me to church and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend!
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.

BASSANIO [reads]
Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my
creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to
the Jew is forfeit, and since in paying it, it is impossible
I should live, all debts are cleared between you and I if
I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use
your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to
come, let not my letter.

PORTIA
O love, dispatch all business and begone!

BASSANIO
Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make haste. [They exit.]
Scene 4
=======
[Enter Portia, Nerissa, Lorenzo, Jessica, and Balthazar,
a man of Portia's.]


LORENZO
Madam, 
But if you knew to whom you show this honor,
How true a gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
Than customary bounty can enforce you.

PORTIA
I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now; Which makes me think that this Antonio,
Being the bosom lover of my lord,
Must needs be like my lord. Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
The husbandry and manage of my house
Until my lord's return. For mine own part,
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerissa here,
Until her husband and my lord's return.
I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition,

LORENZO  Madam, with all my heart.
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

PORTIA
My people do already know my mind
So fare you well till we shall meet again.

LORENZO
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!

JESSICA
I wish your Ladyship all heart's content.

PORTIA
Fare you well, Jessica.
[Lorenzo and Jessica exit.]
Now, Balthazar,
take this same letter,
And use thou all th' endeavor of a man
In speed to Padua. See thou render this
Into my cousin's hands, Doctor Bellario.
[She gives him a paper.]
And look what notes and garments he doth give
thee,
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed
Unto the common ferry
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
But get thee gone. 

BALTHAZAR
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.	[He exits.]

PORTIA
Come on, Nerissa. We'll see our husbands
Before they think of us.

NERISSA  Shall they see us?

PORTIA
They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack. 

NERISSA  Why, shall we turn to men?

PORTIA  Fie, what a question's that,
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach. 
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Lancelot, the Clown, and Jessica.]


LANCELOT  Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father
are to be laid upon the children. I was always plain with you,
and so now I speak my agitation of the matter.
Therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you
are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do
you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope
neither.

JESSICA  And what hope is that, I pray thee?

LANCELOT  Marry, you may partly hope that your father
got you not, that you are not the Jew's daughter.

JESSICA  That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so
the sins of my mother should be visited upon me!

LANCELOT  Truly, then, I fear you are damned both by
father and mother; 

JESSICA  I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made
me a Christian.

LANCELOT  Truly the more to blame he! We were Christians
enow before, e'en as many as could well live
one by another. This making of Christians will
raise the price of hogs. 
[Enter Lorenzo.]


JESSICA  I'll tell my husband, Lancelot, what you say.
Here he comes.

LORENZO  I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Lancelot,
if you thus get my wife into corners!

JESSICA  Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo. Lancelot
and I are out. He tells me flatly there's no mercy for
me in heaven because I am a Jew's daughter; and
he says you are no good member of the commonwealth,
for in converting Jews to Christians you
raise the price of pork.

LORENZO  I shall answer that better to the commonwealth
than you can the getting up of the Negro's
belly! The Moor is with child by you, Lancelot.

LANCELOT  It is much that the Moor should be more
than reason; but if she be less than an honest
woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.

LORENZO  How every fool can play upon the word! Go in, sirrah, bid them prepare for
dinner.

LANCELOT That is done, sir. They have all stomachs.

LORENZO  Wilt
thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an
instant? I pray thee understand a plain man in his
plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover the
table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to
dinner.

LORENZO
O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?

JESSICA
Past all expressing. 

LORENZO  Even such a husband
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

JESSICA
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that!

LORENZO
I will anon. First let us go to dinner.

JESSICA
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach!

LORENZO
No, pray thee, let it serve for table talk.
Then howsome'er thou speak'st, I shall digest it.

JESSICA  Well, I'll set you forth.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Duke, the Magnificoes, Antonio, Bassanio,
Salerio, and Gratiano, with Attendants.]


DUKE  What, is Antonio here?

ANTONIO  Ready, so please your Grace.

DUKE
I am sorry for thee. Thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, Uncapable of pity, void and empty
From any dram of mercy.

ANTONIO  I have heard
Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
His rigorous course; I am armed
To suffer with a quietness of spirit
The very tyranny and rage of his.

DUKE
Go, one, and call the Jew into the court.

SALARINO
He comes, my lord.

[Enter Shylock.]


DUKE
Make room, and let him stand before our face.--
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then, 'tis thought,
Thou 'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exacts the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
But, touched with humane gentleness and love,
Forgive a moi'ty of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses.
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.

SHYLOCK
I have possessed your Grace of what I purpose,
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter and your city's freedom!
You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive
Three thousand ducats. I'll not answer that,
But say it is my humor. Is it answered?

BASSANIO
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

SHYLOCK
I am not bound to please thee with my answers.


ANTONIO, [to Bassanio]
I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
You may as well use question with the wolf
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;

You may as well do anything most hard
As seek to soften that than which what's harder?--
His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you
Make no more offers, Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.

BASSANIO
For thy three thousand ducats here is six.

SHYLOCK
If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would have my bond.

DUKE
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend'ring none?

SHYLOCK
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchased slave,
Which, like your dogs and mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you
"Let them be free! Marry them to your heirs!
Why sweat they under burdens? You will answer
"The slaves are ours!" 

If you deny me, fie upon your law:
There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
I stand for judgment. Answer: shall I have it?

DUKE
Upon my power I may dismiss this court
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here today.

SALARINO  My lord, here stays without
A messenger with letters from the doctor,
New come from Padua.

DUKE
Bring us the letters. Call the messenger.

BASSANIO
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!

ANTONIO
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Meetest for death. You cannot better be employed, Bassanio,
Than to live still and write mine epitaph.

[Enter Nerissa, disguised as a lawyer's clerk.]


DUKE
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?

NERISSA, [as Clerk]
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
[Handing him a paper, which he reads, aside, while
Shylock sharpens his knife on the sole of his shoe.]

BASSANIO
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

SHYLOCK
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there.

GRATIANO
Not on thy sole but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
Thou mak'st thy knife keen. Can no prayers pierce thee?

SHYLOCK
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.

GRATIANO
O, be thou damned, inexecrable dog,
Thy currish spirit
Governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter,
And Infused its soul in thee, for thy desires
Are wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.

SHYLOCK
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud.
I stand here for law.

DUKE
This letter from Bellario doth commend
A young and learned doctor to our court.
Where is he?

NERISSA, [as Clerk]  He attendeth here hard by
To know whether you'll admit him.

DUKE
With all my heart.--Some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
[Attendants exit.]
Meantime the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
[He reads.]
Your Grace shall understand that, I am very sick, but in the instant that your
messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a
young doctor of Rome. His name is Balthazar. I
acquainted him with the cause in controversy between
the Jew and Antonio the merchant. He is furnished with my opinion,
Which comes with
him at my importunity to fill up your Grace's request
in my stead. I beseech you let his lack of years be no
impediment, I leave him to your gracious acceptance

You hear the learned Bellario what he writes.

[Enter Portia for Balthazar, disguised as a doctor of
laws, with Attendants.]

And here I take it is the doctor come.--
Give me your hand.  You are welcome. Take your place.
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the court?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I am informed throughly of the cause.
Which is the merchant here? And which the Jew?

DUKE
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Is your name Shylock?

SHYLOCK  Shylock is my name.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
[To Antonio.] You stand within his danger, do you
not?

ANTONIO
Ay, so he says.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Do you confess the bond?

ANTONIO
I do.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Then must the Jew be merciful.

SHYLOCK
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
The quality of mercy is not strained.
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
'It is an attribute to God Himself;
And earthly power doth then show likest God's
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this:
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
Which, if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant
there.

SHYLOCK
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Is he not able to discharge the money?

BASSANIO
Yes. Here I tender it for him in the court,
Yea, twice the sum.. [To the Duke.] And I
beseech you,
Wrest once the law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It must not be. There is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established;

SHYLOCK
A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel.
O wise young judge, how I do honor thee!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I pray you let me look upon the bond.

SHYLOCK
Here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.
[Handing Portia a paper.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Shylock, there's thrice thy money offered thee.

SHYLOCK
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven!
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No, not for Venice!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Why, this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the merchant's heart.--Be merciful;
Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.

SHYLOCK
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me. I stay here on my bond.

ANTONIO
Most heartily I do beseech the court
To give the judgment.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Why, then, thus it is:
You must prepare your bosom for his knife--

SHYLOCK  Ay, his breast!
So says the bond, doth it not, noble judge?
"Nearest his heart." Those are the very words.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It is so.
Are there balance here to weigh the flesh?

SHYLOCK  I have them ready.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

SHYLOCK
Is it so nominated in the bond?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It is not so expressed, but what of that?
'Twere good you do so much for charity.

SHYLOCK
I cannot find it. 'Tis not in the bond.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
You, merchant, have you anything to say?

ANTONIO
But little. I am armed and well prepared.--
Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well.
Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you,
Commend me to your honorable wife,
Tell her how I loved you, speak me fair in death,

BASSANIO
Antonio, I am married to a wife
Which is as dear to me as life itself,
I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them both
Here to this devil, to deliver you.

PORTIA, [aside]
Your wife would give you little thanks for that
.

GRATIANO
I have a wife who I protest I love.
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

NERISSA, [aside]
'Tis well you offer it behind her back.

SHYLOCK
We trifle time. I pray thee, pursue sentence.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine:
The court awards it, and the law doth give it.

SHYLOCK  Most rightful judge!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Tarry a little. There is something else.
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.
The words expressly are "a pound of flesh."
if thou dost shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are by the laws of Venice confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.

GRATIANO
O upright judge!--Mark, Jew.--O learned judge!

SHYLOCK
Is that the law?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Thyself shalt see the act.
For, as thou urgest justice, be assured
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir'st.

GRATIANO
O learned judge!--Mark, Jew, a learned judge!

SHYLOCK
I take this offer then. Pay the bond thrice
And let the Christian go.

BASSANIO  Here is the money.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Soft! The Jew shall have all justice. He shall have nothing but the penalty.

GRATIANO
O Jew, an upright judge, a learned judge!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
But just a pound of flesh. If thou tak'st more
Or less than a just pound, 
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

GRATIANO
A second Daniel! A Daniel, Jew!
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.

SHYLOCK
Give me my principal and let me go.

BASSANIO
I have it ready for thee. Here it is.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
He hath refused it in the open court.
He shall have merely justice and his bond.

GRATIANO
A Daniel still, say I! A second Daniel!--
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

SHYLOCK
Shall I not have barely my principal?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
, Jew.

SHYLOCK
Why, then, the devil give him good of it!
I'll stay no longer question.	[He begins to exit.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Tarry, Jew.
The law hath yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an alien
That by direct or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any citizen,
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,
And the offender's life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, 'gainst all other voice.
Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

GRATIANO
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself!

DUKE
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's;
The other half comes to the general state,


SHYLOCK
Nay, take my life and all. Pardon not that.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?


ANTONIO
So please my lord the Duke and all the court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content, so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death unto the gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Onething provided more: that for this favor
He presently become a Christian;


DUKE
He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?

SHYLOCK
I am content.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Clerk, draw a deed of gift.

SHYLOCK
I pray you give me leave to go from hence.
I am not well. Send the deed after me
And I will sign it.

DUKE  Get thee gone, but do it.

GRATIANO
In christ'ning shalt thou have two godfathers.

[Shylock exits.]

DUKE, [to Portia as Balthazar]
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon.
I must away this night toward Padua,


DUKE
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.--
Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
For in my mind you are much bound to him.
[The Duke and his train exit.]

BASSANIO, [to Portia as Balthazar]
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof
Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

ANTONIO
And stand indebted, over and above,
In love and service to you evermore.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
I pray you know me when we meet again.
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.
[She begins to exit.]

BASSANIO
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as fee. 

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
And for your love I'll take this ring from you.
Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this.

BASSANIO
This ring, good sir? Alas, it is a trifle.
I will not shame myself to give you this.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I will have nothing else but only this.
And now methinks I have a mind to it.

BASSANIO
There's more depends on this than on the value.
for this, I pray you pardon me.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers.

BASSANIO
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
Well, peace be with you.
[Portia and Nerissa exit.]

ANTONIO
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.


BASSANIO
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him.
Give him the ring, [Gratiano exits.]
Come Antonio, in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont..
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Portia and Nerissa, still in disguise.]


PORTIA
Inquire the Jew's house out; give him this deed
And let him sign it. [She gives Nerissa a paper.] We'll
away tonight,
And be a day before our husbands home.
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

[Enter Gratiano.]


GRATIANO
Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en.
My Lord Bassanio, upon more advice,
Hath sent you here this ring,	[He gives her a ring.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  His ring I do accept most thankfully,
Furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylock's house.

GRATIANO
That will I do.

NERISSA, [as Clerk]  Sir, I would speak with you.
[Aside to Portia.] I'll see if I can get my husband's
ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep forever.

PORTIA, [aside to Nerissa]
Thou mayst, I warrant! Away, make haste! Thou know'st where I will tarry.
[She exits.]

NERISSA, [as Clerk]
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====
Scene 1
=======
[Enter Lorenzo and Jessica.]


LORENZO
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees
And they did make no noise, in such a night
Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night.

JESSICA  In such a night
Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself
And ran dismayed away.

LORENZO  In such a night
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
As far as Belmont.

JESSICA  In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And ne'er a true one.

LORENZO  In such a night
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
Slander her love, and he forgave it her.

JESSICA
I would out-night you did nobody come,
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

[Enter Stephano, a Messenger.]


LORENZO
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

STEPHANO  A friend.

LORENZO
A friend? What friend? Your name, I pray you,
friend.

STEPHANO
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont. She doth stray about
By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.

LORENZO  Who comes with her?

STEPHANO
None but a holy hermit and her maid.
I pray you, is my master yet returned?

LORENZO
He is not, nor we have not heard from him.--
But ceremoniously let us prepare
Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

[Enter Lancelot, the Clown.]


LANCELOT  Sola, sola! Wo ha, ho! Sola, sola!

LORENZO  Who calls?

LANCELOT Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master
Lorenzo, sola, sola!

LORENZO  Leave holloaing, man! Here.

LANCELOT  Sola! Where, where?

LORENZO  Here!

LANCELOT  Tell him there's a post come from my master
with his horn full of good news. My master will
be here ere morning, sweet soul.	[Lancelot exits.]

LORENZO, [to Jessica]
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.
[Stephano exits.]
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank.
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.

[Enter musicians.]


[Music plays.]

JESSICA
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.

LORENZO
The reason is, your spirits are attentive.


[Enter Portia and Nerissa.]



[Music ceases.]



LORENZO  Dear lady, welcome home.

PORTIA
We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
Are they returned?

LORENZO  Madam, there is come a messenger before
To signify their coming.

PORTIA  Go in, Nerissa.
Give order to my servants that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence--
Nor you, Lorenzo--Jessica, nor you.
[A trumpet sounds.]

LORENZO
Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet.
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.

[Enter Bassanio, Antonio, Gratiano, and their followers.]


PORTIA 
You are welcome home, my lord.
[Gratiano and Nerissa talk aside.]

BASSANIO
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.
This is the man, this is Antonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.

PORTIA
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For as I hear he was much bound for you.
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.

GRATIANO, [to Nerissa]
By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong!
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
.

PORTIA
A quarrel ho, already! What's the matter?

GRATIANO
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
That she did give me, whose posy was
"Love me, and leave me not."

NERISSA
What talk you of the posy or the value?
You swore to me when I did give it you
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge's clerk! 

GRATIANO
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
I could not for my heart deny it him.

PORTIA
You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
I gave my love a ring and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands.
An 'twere to me I should be mad at it.

BASSANIO, [aside]
Why, I were best to cut my left hand off
And swear I lost the ring defending it.

GRATIANO
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge that begged it,.

PORTIA  What ring gave you, my lord?
Not that, I hope, which you received of me.

BASSANIO
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it, but you see my finger
It is gone.

PORTIA
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed
Until I see the ring!

NERISSA, [to Gratiano]  Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine!

BASSANIO  Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

PORTIA
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
You would not then have parted with the ring.
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
I'll die for 't but some woman had the ring!

BASSANIO
No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me
And begged the ring, the which I did deny him
And suffered him to go displeased away,
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?


PORTIA
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house!
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you:
I'll not deny him anything I have,
No, not my body, nor my husband's bed.


NERISSA
And I his clerk. Therefore be well advised
How you do leave me to mine own protection.

GRATIANO
Well, do you so. Let not me take him, then,
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.

ANTONIO
I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.

PORTIA
Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome
notwithstanding.

BASSANIO
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.

ANTONIO
I once did lend my body for his wealth,
I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.

PORTIA
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
[Giving Antonio a ring.]
And bid him keep it better than the other.

ANTONIO
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.

BASSANIO
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!

PORTIA
I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio,
For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.

NERISSA
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same doctor's clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
[She shows a ring.]


PORTIA

[She hands a paper to Bassanio.]
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure.
It comes from Padua from Bellario.
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there, her clerk. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And even but now returned. Antonio, you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon.
[Handing him a paper.]
There you shall find three of your argosies
Are richly come to harbor suddenly.



BASSANIO, [to Portia]
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

ANTONIO
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;

PORTIA  How now, Lorenzo?
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

NERISSA
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
[Handing him a paper.]
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possessed of.

LORENZO
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
Of starved people.

PORTIA  It is almost morning,
Let us go in,
And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.

GRATIANO
Let it be so. The first inter'gatory
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is
Whether till the next night she had rather stay
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.
[They exit.]




